feat(blog): add form-js@1.6.0 blog post (valentin edition) (#186)
bpmn-io/bpmn.io: src/blog/2023/011-form-js-1.6.md

---

title: Working with array data in form-js@1.6
description: "Discover how form-js 1.6 changes the game with the Dynamic List and Table components, enhancing complexity and usability in your forms."
preview_image: http://bpmn.io/assets/attachments/blog/2023/008-form-js-1-6-update.png
layout: blogpost.hbs
slug: 2023-form-js-1-6-dynamic-list-and-table
author: 
- Valentin Serra <https://github.com/skaiir>
published: 2023-12-19 12:00
releases:
- 'form-js@1.6.0'

---

<p class="introduction">

>   The release of [form-js@1.6](https://github.com/bpmn-io/form-js) didn't take long, but its impact on handling array data is a game changer. In this update, we introduce two powerful components: tables for elegant tabular data display and dynamic lists for crafting flexible, repeatable, and editable form sections. These components are designed to enable working with complex data arrangements, without altering the familiar workflow of the form builder.

Reviewer: I love this into, maybe something to take over! :)

</p>

<!-- continue -->

In our continuous effort over recent months, we wanted to build a powerful way you deal with arrays of data. Our goal was to enable handling of arrays of any data structures, giving you complete control over your data outputs. We settled on a very flexible solution while maintaining the ease and familiarity of the current form builder interactions.

## Dynamic lists, the flexible solution to array data entry

> Our new dynamic list component brings unprecedented flexibility to form-js, enabling users to dynamically add or remove repetitions of a form section, while handling all the data mapping for you out of the box.

Reviewer: I'd personally be a little bit less braggy, and drop "unprecedented".

Now, what if you're dealing with much larger data sets that you want to render in the application, browse through, maybe use as a reference within your form?

## The first iteration of Tables

If you need to display large datasets, for reference purpose for example, you may use the new table component.   

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-tables.gif">
  <p class="caption">
    Efficiently manage tabular data with the new Table Component.
  </p>
</div>

Our first iteration already brings in plenty of functionality, namely row sorting, pagination with control over each page's height, and both static and dynamic definition of headers which means you have the ability to render your tables entirely from input data definitions, giving you a great deal of programatic control over the final appearance.

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-tables-more.png">
  <p class="caption">

>     We're not done yet with this component. We will iterate upon tables based on feedback, and see where we can take it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Tables are there. What else you need?
```

  </p>
</div>

## Our focus for 1.7

> As you've probably noticed, form-js has grown a lot in the last year or two. We've made a lot of experimental calls, and built a lot of new things from scratch. But we haven't had dedicated time to step off the gas yet, which has caused some performance slowdowns and some of the usual problems in growing projects. 

Reviewer: Let's take this into the other blog. Very good to openly share our future plans.

So, we've decided not to focus on any major features for 1.7, but instead to polish, get rid of architectural pains in the code base and improve the performance of form-js rendering.

So if you're one of those folks rendering forms with 1000+ elements and struggling, be on the lookout for this next release, this one's for you.

Happy holiday season everyone!

# Wrapping Up

To discover all the enhancements in form-js 1.6 and recent versions, check out our [full changelog](https://github.com/bpmn-io/form-js/blob/master/packages/form-js/CHANGELOG.md#140).

> We are always looking for feedback, so if you've spotted a bug, have an improvement to suggest, or just a related thought really, then don't be shy and reach out to us via [our forums](https://forum.bpmn.io/), tweet us [@bpmn_io](https://twitter.com/bpmn_io), or file any issue you found in [the form-js issue tracker](https://github.com/bpmn-io/form-js/issues).

Reviewer: We switched from Twitter to Mastodon, cf. other blogs, and need to adjust accordingly.

---

title: Working with Array Data in form-js@1.6
description: "Discover the new dynamic list and table components. Learn how they allow you to handle array data with ease."
preview_image: http://bpmn.io/assets/attachments/blog/2023/011-dynamic-list-readonly.png
layout: blogpost.hbs
slug: 2023-form-js-1-6-dynamic-list-and-table
author:
  - Vinicius Goulart <https://github.com/vsgoulart>
  - Valentin Serra <https://github.com/skaiir>
published: 2023-12-19 12:00
releases:
  - 'form-js@1.6.0'

---

<p class="introduction">
  The release of [form-js@1.6](https://github.com/bpmn-io/form-js) didn't take long, but its impact on handling array data is a game changer. This update introduces two powerful components: tables for elegant tabular data display and dynamic lists for crafting flexible, repeatable, and editable form sections. We designed these components to allow working with complex data arrangements without altering the familiar workflow of the form builder.
</p>

<!-- continue -->

> In our continuous effort over recent months, we wanted to build a powerful way to deal with arrays of data. Our goal was to enable the handling of arrays of any data structures, giving you complete control over your data outputs. We settled on a very flexible solution while maintaining the ease and familiarity of the current form builder interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our continuous effort over recent months, we wanted to build a powerful way to deal with arrays of data. Our goal was to enable the handling of arrays of any data structures, giving you complete control over your data outputs. We settled on a flexible solution while maintaining the ease and familiarity of the current form builder interactions.
```

## Dynamic Lists, the Flexible Solution to Array Data

Our new dynamic list component brings flexibility to form-js, enabling users to dynamically add or remove repetitions of a form section while handling all the data mapping for you out of the box.

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-dynamic-list.gif">
  <p class="caption">
    Add or remove entries of the list with a single click.
  </p>
</div>

> Customize the behavior of your dynamic list. Decide whether adding and removing items should be possible, how many default items to render, how many items to show uncollapsed, and more. We give you quite a lot of control in configuring this component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customize the behavior of your dynamic list: Decide whether adding and removing items should be possible, how many default items to render, how many items to show uncollapsed, and more. We give you quite a lot of control in configuring this component.
```

For example, if you want to use dynamic lists as a read-only array data renderer, simply disable the ability to add/remove entries on the dynamic list, make all the child fields read-only, and voilà.

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-dynamic-list-readonly.png">
  <p class="caption">
    Use the component however you like. It opens up many avenues for creative use cases.
  </p>
</div>

The best part is that you still get all the features you expect from simple elements in your dynamic list repetitions. You may now use the `this` variable within FEEL expressions to refer to the local 'scope' of a dynamic list's rendered element.

> As a small heads-up, we plan to change how these scopes work, so keep this in mind.

Reviewer: What do we want to say here? That users shall not use `this`? 

Whatever we ship (and document in a blog) must be backwards compatible _or_ forward-migratable. Let's be clear if this will break in the future, or not mention it at all.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @nikku I would just not mention this at all now until we have committed to the change

Author: Actually the `this` variable is backwards compatible. The main change is that we're going to make it implicit in the future. So I guess it's still fine to mention it here.

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-dynamic-list-simple-scope.gif">
  <p class="caption">
    Conditionally hide or show on a row-by-row basis within a dynamic list.
  </p>
</div>

> So, while simple on the surface, the dynamic list was the final piece of the puzzle for many elaborate form use cases. The ability to flexibly handle data arrays combined with binding paths and keys leads to making quick configuration and clean data outputs the default experience in form-js.

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence. Let's simplify it.

What if you're dealing with much larger data sets that you want to render in the application, browse through, and use as a reference within your form?

## Tables Displaying Structured Data at Scale

> The new table component in `form-js@1.6.0` brings an improved approach to data displaying within forms, allowing you to work with large amounts of data in a clean and structured environment. They support sorting and pagination, giving you plenty of control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new table component allows you to work with large amounts of data in a clean and structured manner. It supports sorting and pagination, giving you plenty of control.
```

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-tables.gif">
  <p class="caption">
    Efficiently manage tabular data with the new Table Component.
  </p>
</div>

> Using dynamic bindings for table headers, you can render your tables entirely from input data definitions, giving you much programmatic control over the final appearance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using dynamic bindings for table headers, you can render your tables entirely from input data definitions. This gives you a lot of programmatic control over the final appearance.
```

<div class="figure full-size">
  <img src="{{ assets }}/attachments/blog/2023/011-tables-more.png">
  <p class="caption">
    The tables component is there. What else do you need?
  </p>
</div>

## Our Focus for 1.7

Form-js has grown a lot in the last year or two. We've made a lot of experimental calls and built a lot of new things from scratch. Adding many features quickly, we introduced some performance slowdowns, among other things. It's time to take a step off the gas and clean things up.

> With the upcoming 1.7 version, we plan to focus on polishing existing features, fixing any issues we're aware of, eliminating architectural pains in the code base, and working on form rendering performance.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we mention we did some performance upgrades in 1.6.0
